### Is there no such thing as strong engineers, just strong teams?

I want to address a common belief in the ZIRP era (now less prevalent) that strong engineers are only strong in the context of the team, because it's the team that enables an engineer to succeed. According to this view, it doesn't make sense to talk about how some engineers are more effective than others, because the root cause of this effectiveness is always processes at the team level (i.e. systems that produce high psychological safety). I've spent some time working in an environment like this, which was frustrating for a few reasons.

First, everyone who was actually invested in getting stuff done was quietly playing their own game of "shuffle the competent engineers onto my project". But you couldn't actually say "I think this engineer should come and work on X, because it's hard and they're really good". You had to communicate as if it somehow just made more organizational sense for the engineer you wanted to work on your project.

Moderately difficult engineering tasks became near-impossible, since it was mandatory to break them down into well-documented pieces that even the least effective engineer on the team could pick up and accomplish. That meant either covertly making sure the few hard pieces were picked up by the right engineers, or doing the work yourself ahead of time and then writing maximally-granular tasks like "add this function here with this code in it". The first solution is politically hard, since you can't talk about it; the second is technically hard, because you can't make changes mid-implementation like you would if you were actually doing the work.

I don't want to be too negative about this view. The health of a team does have a big impact on how well an engineer can perform. It might even be worth spending most of your time on this as a manager, since you probably can't magically turn weak engineers into workhorses or workhorses into strong engineers. But the extreme version of this view - that there are no weak or strong engineers, just weak or strong teams - is clearly false.
